As-salamu alaykum wa rahmatullahi wa barakatuhu.
As always, we commence by praising Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala, sending blessings and salutations upon Muhammad sallallahu alayhi wa sallam and all his companions.
May Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala bless them and may He bless every single one of us and grant us all goodness. Amin.
Beloved brothers and sisters in Islam, as I walked out yesterday, my young son told me that you have made a mistake. I told him what is the mistake.
He says you said the Sahara Desert when it was the Arabian Desert. So I looked at him and I laughed and I said don't worry, tomorrow I will start with that slip of the tongue.
When we spoke of Umayyah bin Khalaf and how Bilal ibn Rabah remembered everything that had happened and how he was dragged in the desert, it was the Arabian Desert.
And I'm sure we would all have known that it was a mere slip of the tongue. May Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala grant us goodness.
The Battle of Badr, we had completed it. I just want to recap two or three points from this Battle of Badr.
The Prophet ﷺ spent three days in Badr after the war. The reasons for that, so that the enemy does not come back.
They had fled and some of them might decide to come back whilst the Muslims were going to Madinah Munawwarah.
So one of the reasons was or to remain in Badr was to ensure that that does not happen.
Secondly, to bury both sides, to bury the Muslims who had lost their lives, the 14 of those who had lost their lives,
and at the same time to bury the Mushriks in a mass grave or in the pit that they were finally buried in Al-Qalib.
So to bury those who were dead and those who had been martyred.
The third reason was in order to gather the spoils or the booty or that which was left behind by the Kuffar of Quraish as they had departed or as they had fled.
And the fourth reason was that the army needed a little bit of a rest.
And what would happen is if they were to immediately move without resting, perhaps they will get tired and so on.
So it served many purposes and Allah SWT had instructed Muhammad SAW to remain there for three days.
Remember, whatever he did was by the instruction of Allah SWT.
Thereafter, when they got to a place known as As-Safra, there was an instruction that had come from Allah SWT to divide the spoils or the booty in a specific way.
However, mention must be made of the little debate that took place between some of the parties from amongst the Muslims as to what should happen with these spoils.
This was the first major battle.
They had had quite a lot that was left behind by the Kuffar of Quraish.
And so as they were debating what should happen, Allah SWT revealed verses instructing them.
They are asking you about the spoils of war.
Tell them that those spoils of war belong to Allah and His messenger.
Whatever they decide is final.
So be conscious of Allah and sort your matter out.
Don't dispute amongst each other.
And remember, if you are true believers, you will follow Allah and His messenger.
Those are the opening verses of Surah Al-Anfal.
And we ask Allah SWT to grant us goodness.
So Muhammad SAW decided that he will give everyone an equal share.
And he decided to add nine of those who did not take part in the war, who had been left in Madinah Munawwarah by his instruction or who had been sent elsewhere by his instruction at that particular time.
Something also very important.
Two more points that I want to make mention of the Battle of Badr before we proceed.
One is Mus'ab ibn Umayr radiallahu anhu had a brother of his known as Abu Azeez.
And this Abu Azeez ibn Umayr, he was from amongst those who was caught.
And when Mus'ab saw them taking him, he passed a comment.
Before I say what he said, it's important for us to know who was Mus'ab.
Once again we make mention he came from a wealthy family.
He was spoiled to the degree that Rasulullah SAW says from the youngsters of Makkah,
I don't know a single one who has been spoiled this much by his own mother.
And when he accepted Islam, he was tied down by his mother and thereafter he was expelled, he was harmed, he was tortured.
And until there came a time when his skin was flaking off and he was so poor, he didn't even have clothing, he lost his weight and so on.
When Mus'ab saw his brother, who was mashallah looking quite well, but he was from amongst those who was caught.
He tells the captives, you better make sure you ask for a handsome amount from this man because his folks are very wealthy.
Allahu Akbar, his folks are very wealthy.
May Allah SWT grant us a goodness and may He grant us wealth that will be a means of our entry into paradise and not wealth that will be a means of our destruction.
So that was very interesting that even though it was his own brother, but he felt towards him to say the truth and to say look you better get a maximum amount from this man.
May Allah SWT grant us goodness.
And the last point we'd like to mention is, as we said yesterday, that some of the people who didn't have any wealth to pay or to pay the fine for taking part in the war, some of them didn't have the amount.
So the Prophet SAW instructed by Allah SWT, he let some of them go without even taking any amount from them.
One of them was Abu Azzah Al-Sha'ir and we will come to see his story a little bit later on.
We said it yesterday, part of it, that when he told the Prophet SAW, look, I am a person who really doesn't have much.
My family is big and they need me and so on and I really don't have anything to give you.
He was then sent away and Rasulullah SAW told him, you don't ever engage in what you did in the future.
And he said, okay, I won't.
Now, from amongst those who were taken captive were some who didn't have anything but they were educated.
They could read and write.
So the Prophet SAW issued an instruction.
He said, if any one of you can teach 10 of the youngsters of the Ansar how to read and write, we set you free.
Subhanallah.
This showed that the value of learning to read and write and education and the value of being able to understand and so on
was so high that people were granted their freedom just by teaching people how to read and write.
And I normally raise a point when it comes to the teachers.
These people who were captive were not Muslim.
And for them, what was their paradise?
Their paradise was to be set free so that they could live the rest of their lives according to their own desires.
So they were told, if you teach 10 people to read and write, you will get your paradise in the sense that you're going to be free in this world.
And for you, the world is the paradise.
So those who teach the Muslims how to read and write from amongst the Muslims and those from amongst the Muslims to this day.
And we know that teaching is now a profession that many people are turning away from.
Because it is one of the only professions where your progress is gauged by the examination of someone else.
Have you ever thought of that?
A teacher is tested by who?
Not by whether they know it or not, but by whether other people know what they've taught them or not.
So it's very difficult and nowadays people don't really want to teach.
Ask those running schools, may Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala grant us goodness.
The point I am raising is imagine how valuable the reward is that Allah is giving these mushriks of Quraish what they wanted.
Is it impossible for Allah to give us our paradise as a result?
May Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala grant that to us.
And may He make us from those who can teach.
Because definitely even the Prophet salallahu alaihi wa sallam says,
I was actually sent as a teacher.
Obviously the teachings he taught were very spiritual and connected to the link with Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala.
But he was also a teacher and he was a powerful teacher and he did not beat any of his students.
And at the same time, they learned absolutely everything that he had taught them.
May Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala grant us even a portion of that baraka.
Now as we said yesterday, we ended on a point that Banu Qaynuqa' they were people who were living within Madinah Munawwara.
There were three clans of the Jewish people around Madinah 2 and within Madinah 1 of them.
So Banu Qaynuqa' was inside Madinah and as for Banu Qurayza and Banu al-Nadheer,
they were on the outskirts of Madinah Munawwara.
In the marketplace of Banu Qaynuqa' something had happened.
But prior to that, Banu Qaynuqa' were very, very upset when the Quraysh had suffered a defeat
and Muhammad sallallahu alayhi wasallam and his companions had come back.
Allah calls the day of Badr Yawmal Furqan, the day of the criterion,
the day that the deciding factor or the day of the deciding factor.
The Muslims had won and it was a huge victory.
These people were upset. Why?
Because they were hoping that this Muhammad sallallahu alayhi wasallam and his people would lose
and then we would be the leaders once again because they could not engage in all their mischief
when the Prophet sallallahu alayhi wasallam is in their midst or in Madinah Munawwara.
So they had teamed up with one of the hypocrites who joined Islam only for show.
How do we know that? How do we know that this man was a hypocrite?
We can never know unless we were told by Allah and His Rasul sallallahu alayhi wasallam.
So Rasulullah sallallahu alayhi wasallam informed us that Allah informed him a list of names of people
who were actually not Muslim but they were just pretending because they had had no other option
or they felt that it was in the best of their interests.
From amongst them was this man Abdullah ibn Ubay ibn Saloon.
He had accepted Islam just after that.
It is made mention of in a lot of the narrations that it was after the Battle of Badr
and this is when he saw that the Muslims have quite a bit of power and let me join forces with them.
So he had teamed up with the people of Quraysh and he had teamed up with Banu Qaynuqa'
and he tried to tamper with Banu al-Nadir and the others and Allah sallallahu alayhi wasallam exposed him every single time.
So in the marketplace of Banu Qaynuqa' was a Muslim Sahabiyya who was seated
and she was seated, her name is not given to us and obviously if you look at the books of Islamic history
you find whenever something bad has happened to someone the name is always protected in a lot of cases
so that people wouldn't actually be able to say oh this person and that person may Allah sallallahu alayhi wasallam grant us protection
and even though it's not relevant for us to know certain things.
We need to know there was one of our sisters, one of the Sahabiyat, may Allah be pleased with her.
As she was sitting down the bottom of her dress was tied to the top of it with a little stitch
by one of these mischievous men of Banu Qaynuqa'
and when you were sitting you wouldn't really notice anything because the dress is all around
and as she got up part of her leg showed so they started laughing at her.
When they laughed at her one of the Muslims who understood what had happened went to beat up this man from Banu Qaynuqa'
so much so that he died, the man from Banu Qaynuqa' had died
and when this happened the people of Banu Qaynuqa' got up and they started beating up this man until he also died
and thereafter news went to Al-Madeen Al-Munawwara.
Muhammad sallallahu alayhi wasallam announced war, straight.
He told his men let's get up and he with Hamza ibn Abdul Muttalib radiallahu anhu
we are going to Banu Qaynuqa' and we will deal with them.
How dare they break the treaty and they've been engaging in mischief all along
and now they have killed one of our men
and they have disrespected or they have made a fool of one of our sisters.
Subhanallah, how can they do this?
And so Rasulullah sallallahu alayhi wasallam went to them.
Banu Qaynuqa' was shocked because they had known that this mischief of ours is going to come to the fore at some stage.
The Prophet sallallahu alayhi wasallam surrounded them
and decision was being made as to what to do with these people.
He surrounded them for 15 days.
They wanted to fight, they couldn't fight
because the Muslims had outnumbered them
and at the same time they succumbed after 15 days to the pressure
because nothing going in, nothing coming out
and these people are now surrounded for 15 days and they decided let's talk.
So decisions were being made.
The hypocrite Abdullah ibn Ubayy ibn Salool comes to Muhammad sallallahu alayhi wasallam
and what was his power?
He claims or he says because I was supposed to be selected the leader of Medina before you came
so I am one of the top leaders.
So he placed himself as one of the top leaders.
Although he was a nobody.
May Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala protect us.
So this Ubayy comes to Muhammad sallallahu alayhi wasallam
Abdullah ibn Ubayy ibn Salool and he gets hold of him.
He says release these people
and Rasoolullah sallallahu alayhi wasallam says leave me alone.
Meaning you don't need to hold someone in this particular way.
There is a way of speaking.
He says no I won't leave you until you leave these people
because when I had before you came difficulty with other tribes they protected us
and these were the people who did this and who did that
and they had safeguarded us with their lives
and today just because they did one thing you want to now execute them and so on.
So the Prophet sallallahu alayhi wasallam said okay he was quite upset
and he said okay we will leave them but they must leave Madinah Munawwara.
They must go.
This little sabbath must be clear, empty.
So now that was a decision made by the instruction of Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala
Banu Qaynuqaa a little sabbath in Madinah Munawwara where these people were based.
They were told we are giving you three days.
You take your children, your families and you walk out.
Everything else you leave here.
You go.
And the Prophet sallallahu alayhi wasallam who had gone with Hamza ibn Abdul Muttalib
with a group of men.
The Prophet sallallahu alayhi wasallam had placed Ubadah ibn As-Samit radiallahu anhu
as a person who would oversee and supervise the fact that these people left.
And within three days they were gone.
Where did they go?
They all left to Adhru'at.
And they were actually very fortunate that the Prophet sallallahu alayhi wasallam
did not execute some of those perpetrators because by right they had murdered someone
and they had engaged in mischief.
So there could have been a court case there which would be decided within moments
and a few of them would have been executed.
But he did them a favor by telling them okay just leave.
More or less exiling them, sending them away.
So they had gone to a place known as Adhru'at close to Al-Sham which is
as we always say the Syrian region.
The reason why I say region, some people think that Al-Sham refers to Syria.
No, it refers to Syria, Lebanon as well as Palestine and northern Saudi Arabia as well.
That entire part is referred to as Al-Sham.
May Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala grant us a deep understanding.
So this was what had happened for the people or to the people of Banu Qaynuqa'
a lesson for us all.
The respect and dignity of a Muslim, male or female, should be at our hearts.
We should feel pain when one of us is harmed or hurt.
And this is the teaching of Muhammad sallallahu alayhi wa sallam.
He says al-mu'minuna, the believers are like one body.
The head is hurt, the rest of the body is restless.
A little finger is hurt, the whole body is restless.
The day we feel that way we will resolve the matters of the Ummah.
May Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala return us to those genuine feelings today.
Amongst us in one community we have hatred ten ways.
This group and that group and this one don't talk to that one
and that one his own brother he doesn't speak to.
And the other one when he hears that this person has had damage
he is excited and says alhamdulillah instead of saying
may Allah safeguard us and grant him goodness.
We become happy at the loss of others.
لا تظهر الشماتة لأخيك فيرحمه الله ويبتليك
Do not become happy at the loss of your brother
because Allah may have mercy on him
and test you with something similar if not worse.
May Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala grant us goodness.
Thereafter in the same year it is reported or in the following year
it is reported now we are talking of the third year of Hijra
that the Prophet salallahu alaihi wasallam
got his daughter Fatima radiallahu anha
married to Ali ibn Abi Talib radiallahu anhu very briefly.
I can make mention of what happened.
One of the servants of Ali radiallahu anhu
had come up to him and said did you hear
that the daughter of the Prophet salallahu alaihi wasallam Fatima
is now of marriage age.
And at that time they used to marry very early
12 years old, 13, 14, 15 years old
and by that time they were all married
and sometimes even earlier than that
you have cases of people who married a little bit earlier
at the ages of 6 and 7 and 8
and they did not get together or they did not live together
until they arrived at puberty.
When they arrived at puberty at the age of 10 or 11 or 12 and so on
they then were sent to live with their husbands
and Alhamdulillah this was the norm of the time
and as you know the norms change with the changing of times
so what is normal today might seem different
from what was normal at that time
but it was the norm
and what is the norm in one area
sometimes is different in another area
so we should not get excited
and we should not start picking on people
it was their norm
if there was anything wrong in anything that was happening
the people there would have stopped it
but Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala's mercy
and Allah has granted some form of level of acceptance
or to the norm of the people that is acceptable
and this was part of it.
Yesterday we made mention of
the other two daughters of Rasulullah sallallahu alaihi wasallam
Ruqayya and Umm Kulthum
and I had said that they were married to the sons of Abu Lahab.
If you open the books of Islamic history
yes there is report of them having been married to the sons of Abu Lahab
and when Muhammad sallallahu alaihi wasallam came to spread Islam
then he instructed his sons to divorce them
and to leave them because he said
I don't want you to be with these
who are the children of this man
who is inflicting so much harm
or who has reneged from the religion of his forefathers.
Now there are two narrations.
One says that they were married
but they had not consummated
in the sense that it was fixed
like Muhammad sallallahu alaihi wasallam
being married to Aisha radiallahu anha
but there was no consummation at all
it happened later on
so in the same way this
there was no consummation
more or less what we would term today
these people are engaged
and they will get together at some stage
before they got together already
these two were released
and later on they were married to
Uthman ibn Affan radiallahu anha
first Ruqayya binti Rasulillahi sallallahu alaihi wasallam
and just after the battle of Badr
she passed away
imagine the difficulty of the messenger sallallahu alaihi wasallam
he had to go through a lot
he lost his sons
now he is losing his own daughter
and he lost his daughters
all of them besides one
before he passed away himself
and he lost them
subhanallah
and yet he used to pray to Allah sallallahu alaihi wasallam
this is why when we lose our children before us
we should always pray to Allah sallallahu alaihi wasallam
Ya Allah make this a means of my entry into paradise
if the messenger went through this difficulty
that means you have chosen me to go through the same difficulty
that the messenger has gone through
and perhaps Ya Allah grant me a good reward
may Allah sallallahu alaihi wasallam open our doors
and have mercy on all of us
and on those who have lost their children
before their own death
may Allah sallallahu alaihi wasallam grant us ease
so when Ali radiallahu anhu heard this
in fact I was making mention of the other narration
the other narration says that they were married
and thereafter divorced
however we would like to give perhaps strength to the narration
that says it was not consummated yet
and they had divorced them
with Ali radiallahu anhu when he heard this
he wanted to speak to Rasulullah sallallahu alaihi wasallam
but he was a bit shy
and he was told no if you go
the Prophet sallallahu alaihi wasallam will agree
so he comes to Rasulullah sallallahu alaihi wasallam
and he sits in front of him
and he says Ya Rasulullah sallallahu alaihi wasallam
then he is quiet
so the Prophet sallallahu alaihi wasallam says
is there something you want to say
oh Ali
he keeps quiet
oh it's okay
he says
do you want to talk to me about my daughter Fatima
Subhanallah
Allah sallallahu alaihi wasallam grant us an understanding
look at this
the Prophet sallallahu alaihi wasallam already instructed
what is happening
do you want to talk to me about my daughter Fatima
he says yes
he says what do you have
in the sense that
are you going to pay her the mahr
now this in Islam
mahr is not actually a dowry
because a dowry
what happens in some of the cases
they pay an amount to the father
to the mother
to the grandfather
to the uncles
to the aunts
and they have to pay over so many years
and who eats the money
the parents and the others
in Islam there is nothing like that
we say we do not sell human beings
the amount at marriage
is from the groom to the bride
that's it
no other amounts are compulsory in Islam
if there is anything you want to give out of your goodness
to your father in law or to anyone else
no problem
but it is not an Islamic requirement
the mahr in Islam means
an amount from the groom
to the bride
it is basically a payment to say from today on
your responsibility is mine
may Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala grant us
an understanding
so when people say dowry
it must not be misunderstood
in Islam there is nothing like a dowry
that we see across the globe
it is simply an amount from here to there
from the groom to the bride
as for those who brought up these girls
the parents of the girls
the hadith says
the prophet peace be upon him says
for you is paradise
you have brought up someone
to go and live in someone else's home
what you get in return is jannah
it is paradise
and this is why the hadith says
whoever has two daughters
one narration says three daughters
and looks after them well
brings them up
amanah as a trust
gets them married to good homes
that will result in their upliftment
spiritually and so on
for them will be paradise
may Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala grant us goodness
so he said
look I don't have anything at all
so the prophet says
peace be upon him
what about the shield
I gave you once
he says I've got that
he says well we can get that sold
and you will get a certain amount for it
and you can pay that as a mahr
and this is how the prophet
peace be upon him
got his daughter married
to Ali ibn Abi Talib r.a
when he was a man
whose financial standing was zero
he had nothing
absolutely no
today when our daughters want to marry someone
we first look at
how much money does he have
you know what
they might suffer
he's too poor
how do you know
after they get married
he might lose everything
then what happens
and do you know
if you look at our parents
and I'm sure a lot of those
who are of a middle age here
started off very very humbly
and slowly worked up the ladder
now when they are 50, 60 years old
they can afford everything
but now for themselves
their own children
they're saying look for a rich man
but think about how you started
my beloved brother
my beloved sister
may Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala
grant us the ability
to look at the deen
look at Ali ibn Abi Talib
he was a cousin
a friend of Rasulullah s.a.w. as well
and they had had days together
in Makkah al-Mukarramah
and he was the first from the youngsters
who had accepted Islam
and here the prophet
s.a.w. is giving him his daughter
and the prophet s.a.w. says
where's the shield I gave you
which means it was actually from me
to be honest with you anyway
now you're getting it back
it's reported that
they sold it for 400 Daraahim
and they had given that
or he had given that as a mahr
to Fatima radiallahu anha
may Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala
grant us acceptance
and may he make us from those
who realize and understand
from the lessons that we've derived from this
then also Uthman ibn Affan radiallahu anhu
as we've heard
the one wife of his Ruqayya
the daughter of Rasulullah s.a.w. passed away
after some time
it's reported that after some time
the prophet s.a.w. got him married
to his other daughter Um Kulthum
and this is why Uthman was known as the Nurayn
we made mention of this yesterday
may Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala
grant us happy homes
may he grant us spouses
who will be the coolness of our eyes, Ameen
we have another thing that happened
after the battle of Badr
and after Banu Qaynuqa and so on
there were certain people who were criminals
who were sought after by the Muslims
by the prophet s.a.w.
because of their crimes
crimes against humanity, against the Muslims
because of what they had done
and these were criminals of the highest order
the prophet s.a.w.
ordered their execution
and a few of them were executed from amongst them
was one leader from amongst the Jews
who was known as Ka'b ibn al-Ashraf
and he was very very venomous, very dangerous
he has caused lots of harm to the Muslims
and he was a person who was really a criminal of note
and the prophet s.a.w. instructed his execution
and he was executed
and this came as a lesson for all those
who intended harm
may Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala protect us
now we move on to the next battle
the next major battle that took place
was the battle of Uhud
between Badr and Uhud there were skirmishes
there were a few little battles
a few little run-ins between the Muslims
and some of the Mushriks
some of those who had taken part
on the side of Quraish
when it came to the battle of Badr
and they were just being dealt with
and sorted out, nothing major
but the kuffar of Quraish
when they got back to Makkah
they heard the news
they were upset
Quraish had banned crying
nobody is allowed to cry
why? if we cry
the Muslims are going to laugh at us
so no one is allowed to cry over their dead
although the leaders were executed in that war
so what did Quraish do?
they got together at Dar al-Najwa
that house
and subhanallah
they decided with Abu Sufyan
that you know now you are one of our leaders here
you are the man who came with the caravan
that caravan was saved
so every one of us
all the prophets we've made from that caravan
we are going to use that
contributing it to another war
that we are going to take to the Muslims in Madinah
and crush them once and for all
how much money did they make from there?
fifty thousand dinars
dinars are gold coins
they had made fifty thousand gold coins
you know I was just reading this today
and thinking to myself
a group of camels
at that time
coming from Ash-Sham
right down to Makkah
and in one container
they made fifty thousand gold coins
subhanallah
what type of business people were these?
today mashallah we can bring two three containers
do you think you would get profit of
fifty thousand gold coins just by that?
may Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala grant us baraka
in whatever He gives us
so this was the business mind
of the people of Quraysh
they were shrewd
and they knew how to make money
and now they all promised
at that house Dar al-Nadwa
they said
Abu Sufyan
you are our leader
all this wealth
we all coming out
everyone is going to come out
and so with this fifty thousand
they had bought
or they had purchased
lots of weaponry
and sorted it out
made it very
you know
sharp and so on
their spears and arrows
and they had prepared with their
armor and shields and what have you
and the horses
and the fodder for the horses and so on
and they were ready
and they started marching out
to Madinatul Munawwarah
once they were ready
they began to march
now there were certain people
who did not go out with them
who didn't go out with these people?
from amongst them
was this man
Abu Azzah al-Sha'ir
he said
look I can't come out
because I was amongst the captives
poor man
when Muhammad sallallahu alayhi wa sallam
released me
he told me
don't ever do this again
and I promised him I wouldn't
so I'm not going to go back there
now if they catch me
I won't be able to
one narration says
they put a lot of pressure on him
and they dragged him with
another narration says
no they did not drag him with
however
Al-Abbas ibn Abdul Muttalib
the uncle of Rasulullah sallallahu alayhi wa sallam
who had returned to Makkah
he also did not come out
he said I am not coming
I
it's very fresh in my mind
what happened in Badr
and I'm not interested in fighting
the Muslims and so on
and he
wrote a letter
to Muhammad sallallahu alayhi wa sallam
his nephew
oh my nephew
Quraish is coming out
with so many men
and Quraish is coming out
with three thousand strong men
now this is three times the size
of what they came out with
the first time
and
they have so much weaponry
and they have
with them their women
they took out their women as well
because they said
if we see our women
it will encourage us to fight
because we won't want them
to become from amongst
the captives of war
and they took out
their women
their drink
their dances
and so on
they were excited once again
and they started marching
the Prophet sallallahu alayhi wa sallam
got information of this
the letter was received
by Rasulullah sallallahu alayhi wa sallam
in the meantime Quraish
went to a few of the smaller clans
Banu al-Mustaliq
and Banu al-Hun
and a few others
and told them
do you know what
we all need to go and fight
everyone
bring your
those who are fighters
from amongst you
we're going to
Madina Munawwara
so they had been joined
by some of these tribes
remember this name
Banu al-Mustaliq
the reason is later on
the Prophet sallallahu alayhi wa sallam
went to attack them
because they sided with Quraish
and they came to attack the Muslims
so when we had a chance
we went back to tell them
why did you take part
on the wrong side
the treaties always stated
that those who sided with the enemy
were considered enemy
may Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala
protect us
so as they marched
they took together with them
another man
and his followers
Abu Amir al-Rahim
he was a man from Al-Aws
and he was a person
who was supposed to be
one of the leaders
in Madina Munawwara
with Abdullah ibn Ubayy ibn Salul
and in fact
when they were about to
appoint Abdullah ibn Ubayy ibn Salul
then the Prophet sallallahu alayhi wa sallam
came to Madina Munawwara
this Abu Amir ran away
and as for Ubayy ibn Salul
he decided to become
a Muslim by name
and yet he was not a Muslim
so Abu Amir al-Rahim
he joined the Quraish
and he also proceeded
to Madina Munawwara
from amongst them
was a man
who was a slave of
Jubayr ibn al-Mu'tain
and his name was Wahshin
this man was a slave
from Abyssinia
and his master told him
that I will free you
on condition that you
execute Hamza ibn Abdul Muttalib
because he is the one
who executed my uncle
so Wahshi he was an innocent man
he was a little slave
but he decided
look I need my freedom
obviously I want to be a free man
so let me go
he also joined the ranks
and then they arrived
at a place close to Madina Munawwara
just before Uhud
and before they had arrived there
the Messenger sallallahu alayhi wa sallam
prepared his army
and he had a system
of preparing the army
he got the people together
he spoke to them
he asked them
look this is what it is
we need to say
hasbunallahu wa ni'mal wakil
Allah is enough for us
and definitely he is the best
disposer of affairs
this is a dua
that Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala
had taught Muhammad sallallahu alayhi wa sallam
who in turn taught the Muslims
when something happens to you
hasbunallahu wa ni'mal wakil
Allah is enough for us
and he is the best disposer of affairs
so some of the people suggested
let's stay in Madina
we will fortify the place nicely
and we will attack them
from within Madina Munawwara
who had this opinion?
the older people
some of the older people
and Abdullah ibn Ubay ibn Salul
that hypocrite
he said no let's stay inside Madina
and let the enemy come
and we will attack them
from within here
and the youngsters
a lot of the young people
from amongst them was
Hamza ibn Abdul Muttalib as well
who was a little bit older
but he said let us go out
and we face them outside
because if we face them
whilst we are inside
if they win
what will happen to our women
and everyone else
we'd rather go outside
we face them there
fight them there
and sort the war out
out there
and thereafter it can be decided
and we will not have
to have them desecrate
our homes here
in Madina Munawwara
and they kept on
telling the messenger
this is our opinion
it's a more solid opinion
we are the fighters
we are going to be fighting
we know
we want to go out
and so on
until the Prophet
sallallahu alayhi wasallam
decided okay
what will happen
we will fight them outside
let's all proceed
and it is reported
that on a Friday Jumu'ah
the Prophet
sallallahu alayhi wasallam
took these men out
and the Prophet
sallallahu alayhi wasallam
proceeded towards Badr
sorry towards Uhud
and Uhud is very very close
now it is considered
as inside Madina
at that time
it was outside
Madina Munawwara
and they took their time
getting there
so at Salat al-Jumu'ah
the Prophet
sallallahu alayhi wasallam
led the Salat
and he thereafter
gave a Khutba to his people
and he told them
look we are going
the idea here is
to defend ourselves
remember
we did not initiate
this battle
it is them who are
coming to us
take a look
Badr is closer to
Madina than Mecca
and Quraish wanted to fight
although the Muslims
went for the caravan
but in this instance
Quraish came all the way
to fight the Muslims
so who was the one
who initiated it
it was Quraish
they came to Madina Munawwara
and this is why the Prophet
sallallahu alayhi wasallam
all these people
look we need to be disciplined
we need to remember
that Allah has granted us
victory in the past
through obedience
so obey Allah
and if you obey Allah
Allah will help you
and if you disobey Allah
Shaytan will be with you
so we ask Allah
sallallahu alayhi wasallam
to save us from Shaytan
and the Prophet
sallallahu alayhi wasallam
thereafter
he had taken 1,000 men with him
1,000 men
so the Mushriks
were 3,000 heavily armed
they came with everything
they had had
and they were on their way
to Uhud almost there
the Muslims 1,000 strong men
and as they progressed
the Prophet sallallahu alayhi wasallam
thereafter
had gone into one of the rooms
and worn his armor
he wore some of the armor
that he used to wear
and when he came out
some of the older people
told him
you know
we see that you are forced
to leave Medina Munawwara
by these young people
it's okay
let's go back in
we won't fight
we can perhaps
look at a different way
of dealing with these people
he gave them a statement
which was very powerful
he says
you should know
that no messenger of Allah
puts on an armor
and then takes it off
without facing that enemy
may Allah sallallahu alayhi wasallam
grant us
an understanding
no messenger of Allah
has ever put on an armor
and then removed it
without Allah
having decided between them
and the enemy
which means without them
having fought
may Allah sallallahu alayhi wasallam
protect us all
so thereafter
they proceeded
and they got to a certain place
where they camped
for the evening
in the meantime
the Prophet sallallahu alayhi wasallam
had given the flags
to three people
the Muhajireen
they had
the biggest flag
it was given to Mus'ab ibn Umayr
it was considered
the main flag
which was the flag
of the army of the Muslims
and as for the Ansar
they were divided into two
the Khazraj
the flag was given to
Al-Hubab ibn Al-Munthir
and Aws
the flag was given to
Usaid ibn Hudayr
and these three
had proceeded
with the Muslim army
for your information
the flags were very important
because
when a flag was up
it meant the army
is still hot
it's fighting
and it has all its weaponry
it has its strength
once the flag drops
the army is more or less confused
because it's like
the headquarters
it's like we're looking
for our leaders there
so the flags were given
to strategic people
always
even the Mushriks
they had their flags
which were given
to strategic people
from amongst them
in this case
I've given you the names
the main flag
was held by
Mus'ad ibn Umayr
r.a.
when they got to Raqs al-Thaniyya
that was a certain place
Raqs al-Thaniyya
is actually between
Madinah and Uhud
there is like a garden there
as they got to the garden
the Prophet s.a.w.
saw a large
battalion of people
coming to join his army
and he asked
who are these?
and he was told
this is the group
of Abdullah ibn Ubayy ibn Salul
from amongst them
are the people of the book
of the tribes
the Jewish tribes
who have settled here
in Madinah
the Prophet s.a.w.
said
tell them to go back
we are not going
to get their help
to attack the Mushriks here
Subhanallah
we are not going
to get their help
to attack the Mushriks
now
there was some reasoning
behind it
because as it is
there was disturbance
these people
could have been
part of the enemy
without us knowing
and they could have
come in the ranks
and then caused
a lot of destruction
so the Prophet s.a.w.
sent them all back
and they had gone back
the group of people
who were allied
to
Abdullah ibn Ubayy ibn Salul
and as for Abdullah ibn Ubayy ibn Salul
after they had spent that night
after they had spent the night
the Prophet s.a.w.
in early morning decided
let us now go
towards Uhud
and as he was going
the last leg of the journey
it's not a very long journey
Abdullah ibn Ubayy decides
with 300 men
we are going back to Madinah
we are not fighting
why?
because we told you
we don't want to fight
we told you
that we would like
to stay in Madinah
we are older people
and you listened
to the youngsters
you listened to those
who don't really
have much experience
and you came out
why should we come out?
so we are going back
now this was a big problem
very big problem
because one third of the army
of the Muslims
is going back
and with them is
Abdullah ibn Ubayy ibn Salul
so he was indeed
part of the enemy
and he was part of the problem
so now what happened?
some of the tribes
almost joined him
some of the tribes of the Ansar
but Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala
granted them strength
so with him were
300 people who were all
close to him
and connected to him
in one way or the other
and they had gone back
to Madinah and Munawwar
or they decided to go back
and Allah protected the rest
however
Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala
had revealed verses later on
to tell us
and to instruct us
what had happened
to tell us what has happened
there one of the sahabah
radiallahu anhum
the father of Jabir ibn Abdullah
he went to Abdullah ibn Ubayy
and he tried to tell him
look come back
how can you decide to do this?
we are all out here
we accepted the messenger
we told him we would
protect him
we said that we would
protect Madinah
and so on
and now you want to
go away
and the Muslims were
divided into two groups
some of them said no
let us stop everything
and fight Abdullah ibn Ubayy
we are 700 odd
they are 300 odd
we fight them here and now
and the other group said no
leave them for now
we have a bigger enemy
to go and to deal with
so you see there is
already a crack
may Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala
protect us
and at this point
Allah reveals verses
what is it with you?
how can you dispute
about the hypocrites?
when Allah sent them back
because of their deeds
they had evil deeds
Allah did not want them
to take part in the battle
so Allah is the one
who sent them back
Allahu Akbar
and Allah says
when Allah misguides someone
nobody can guide him
they want you to disbelieve
just like they disbelieve
so don't even turn
towards them
and at that stage
they were left
they were told to go back
that saved a huge difficulty
because the Muslims
were deciding to fight them
and Allah said
leave them alone
let them go back
they are the hypocrites
and so on
and these verses
were extremely powerful
and decisive at the same time
the Prophet sallallahu alaihi wasallam
as he had come out
and we made mention
of 300 people going back
with Abdullah ibn Ubayy ibn Salul
it was Abdullah ibn Amr ibn Haram
who had spoken to him
and thereafter
Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala
revealed the verses
that I had just read out to you
and after that
the army proceeded to Uhud
when they arrived in Uhud
they scouted the place
and they saw it
and they decided
we are going to stand in a way
that we will be facing Medina
and the mountain will be behind us
so they were facing Medina Munawwara
and they stood in a way
that the mountain was behind them
when the Kuffar had come around
they were on the other side of the valley
they came and they stood
on the other side
so their backs
were facing Medina Munawwara
and the front was facing the mountain
and the Prophet sallallahu alaihi wasallam
as always
he gave a lecture
powerful lecture to his people
short but to the point
he says look
your sustenance is written
by Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala
you will not die
until everything written
next to your name gets to you
so don't think that
by making haste to get something
you are actually going to increase
your sustenance
no
what Allah has written for you
will come to you
so be careful
and fear Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala
and at the same time
obey instructions
for it is the obedience
that granted us victory in Badr
how did we get victory in Badr
obedience
they obeyed Allah in His instruction
when Allah told them go to Badr
they all went
when Allah said
you will now fight these people
they all fought
so now
the Prophet sallallahu alaihi wasallam
warned them
he gave them a powerful lecture
and thereafter
he had placed the rose
as he always places
with those who were
who had the arrows
and bows in the front
and the horse men behind
and thereafter
you have a new group of people
because there was a mountain
behind them
there was a mountain
the Mount Uhud
Mount Uhud is a huge mountain
and it has a few hillocks
around it
so the Prophet sallallahu alaihi wasallam
when he studied Uhud
he placed between 40 and 50 archers
some most of the narration say 50
some of them say between 40 and 50
he placed these archers on the hillock
and the head of these archers
was a man known as
Abdullah ibn Jubayr al-Ansari
powerful man
the Prophet sallallahu alaihi wasallam
told him in front of all the archers
look we are placing you on this hillock
you are here to protect our backs
if you see we are winning
don't leave this mount
if you see we are losing
no matter what happens
do not leave this mount
that's the instruction
because this is a strategic place
from which the enemy can attack
they understood it very carefully mashaAllah
and they were also very active
with their spears and arrows
from the top there
Alhamdulillah
and as we mentioned yesterday
or previously when we spoke
of the battle of Badr
they started with the duels
this time it was slightly different
in the sense that
previously three came out from the Mushriks
three came out from the Muslims
this time one of the men
came out from the Mushriks
and immediately as he came out
Az-Zubayr ibn al-Awwam
came out to him
executed him
they were shocked
within a minute the war had started
but the two armies
one was on the side
closer to Madina
and the other one was on the side
closer to Mecca
and one man is already gone
this is the duel that they had had
so immediately after that
Talha ibn Abi Talha came out
and as he came out
he was a Mushrik from the Meccan army
Ali ibn Abi Talib radiallahu anhu
came out and executed him
within a minute he was also gone
now his son decides
let me come out
in fact his brother
Uthman ibn Abi Talha
he was also a Mushrik
as he came out
Hamza radiallahu anhu
came out and executed him
and the Mushriks are watching
and they are shocked
because one after the other
they started losing
losing their men
and thereafter
Abu Sa'ad ibn Abi Talha
another brother came out
so Sa'ad ibn Abi Waqas
hit him with an arrow
or with a spear
and he also dropped
executed, gone
thereafter
four of the members
of the same family
one after the other
came out
each one of them was wiped
as they came
and then the Mushriks
became so upset
and it resulted in them
becoming so angry
they started charging forward
with their horses
and as they charged forward
they got to a place
where the arrows were released
by the Muslims
as they were released
in Badr
and the horses were struck
and that caused great chaos
and the horses began to go back
some of them had dropped
people started losing their lives
and it was only
the beginning of this battle
so quick
everything started happening
very very quickly
and thereafter
there was a hot struggle
when I say hot
I mean the heat of the moment
what had happened is
Wahshi says
later on
he became a Muslim
some time later
he was the slave
of Jubayr ibn al-Mutaim
he says
I was watching Hamza
because I had seen him
from the duel
and I knew who he was
and as I'm watching him
I moved to the side
I moved to this side
I had no other job
I did not harm anyone
no one
nothing else did I do
besides holding one spear
and waiting for one man
and he says
when I found him alone
at a certain place
I hit him
and it hit his belly
according to one narration
just below his navel
and he says
I dropped him
he was down cold
and I was done
Allahu Akbar
Hamza ibn Abdul Muttalib
who was known as Asadullah
the lion of Allah
subhanahu wa ta'ala
he was also known as
Sayyid al-Shuhada
the leader of the martyrs
subhanallah
he was also known as
Sayyid al-Shuhada
the leader of the martyrs
subhanallah
he was also known as
the leader of the martyrs
subhanallah
he was martyred
in the battle of Uhud
and the one who killed him
his name was Wahshi
he did it
because he wanted to
earn his freedom
and Hamza ibn Abdul Muttalib
radiallahu anhu
was martyred
and the war became such
that the mushrik
started losing one after the other
they were losing a lot
and as they were losing
they decided to turn back
and to flee
and so they started running away
the people of Makkah
as many as they were
they started running away
leaving behind a lot of their belongings
when they started running away
some of the Muslims
began to gather
some of the belongings
of the mushrik
thinking that let's get it
and put it on one side
so that we know where it is
and so on
and thereafter
Allahu Akbar
something very dangerous happened
which changed the course of the whole war
Abdullah ibn Jubayr al-Ansari
who was the head of the archers
on that mount
found that some of his men insisted
now the war is over
let's go down
and start collecting and gathering
he said no
the instruction of the messenger was this
remain here
they said no no no
the war is over
let's go
so what had happened
a lot of them went
and they left the hillock
when they left the hillock
Abdullah
Allahu Akbar
may Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala grant them goodness
these people who had remained behind
Abdullah ibn Jubayr al-Ansari
and a few of the people
they found Khalid ibn Walid
who was from amongst the mushrik at the time
he had a little battalion with him
when he saw that these people are no longer on the hillock
he decided to come around
and he came onto that mount
and they executed all of the remainder of the archers
who were very few
including Abdullah ibn Jubayr al-Ansari
and what had happened is
he came and sandwiched the Muslims
between the enemy who now turned around
when they had heard a new noise
and they then came and they began to attack the Muslims
and this is when the Muslims suffered great losses on that day
although there was no decisive victor
because the Muslims continued fighting
people began to lose their lives
and from amongst them Mus'ab ibn Umayr radiallahu anhu
who was holding the flag
they chopped off one of his hands
so he held it with the other hand
they sliced his other hand
so he put it close to his chest until they executed him
and the flag dropped
and news spread that Muhammad sallallahu alaihi wasallam
has been killed
and when that happened
there was a lot of chaos in the Muslim army
and thereafter the kuffar began to kill a lot of people
and the sahabah radiallahu anhu
was surrounding Muhammad sallallahu alaihi wasallam
taking the arrows and spears for him
and a lot of them lost their lives in that way
and thereafter you find
the arrows hit Muhammad sallallahu alaihi wasallam
on his face
and he had marks on his cheeks
and he had a gash on his head
and at the same time a rock was thrown on him
and what happened is
the name of the man who threw the rock
he threw this rock on Rasulullah sallallahu alaihi wasallam
which broke his tooth
and Rasulullah sallallahu alaihi wasallam was bleeding
and thereafter you find a man known as
Ubayy ibn Khalaf
he was an enemy of Islam
from the beginning the days of Makkah
he told the messenger
I will kill you
and Rasulullah sallallahu alaihi wasallam says
Inshallah it will be the other way round
so he was now coming for Rasulullah sallallahu alaihi wasallam
and the Sahaba are protecting Muhammad sallallahu alaihi wasallam
and Rasulullah sallallahu alaihi wasallam said
leave him, let him come
and the prophet sallallahu alaihi wasallam took a spear
and threw it which hit him
to the degree that later on when he was running away
he died
it is reported that this was the only person ever
who died as a result of being struck
by Muhammad sallallahu alaihi wasallam
no one else in the life of Muhammad sallallahu alaihi wasallam
was ever struck
which resulted in their death
by Rasulullah sallallahu alaihi wasallam
may Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala grant us an understanding
and may he grant us goodness
it is important for me to make mention
that the Muslims retreated
Hatib ibn Abi Balta'a
was the man who killed this utbah
ibn Abi Waqqas
who had thrown a rock on Rasulullah sallallahu alaihi wasallam
when the Muslims retreated to part of the mount
as the mount subhanallah was behind them
they retreated to part of the mount
and the Prophet sallallahu alaihi wasallam
was being treated by some of his companions
his daughter Fatima radiallahu anha
some of the females of the sahabiyat
had come from a distance
they were assisting with the water
and they were assisting in trying to
help the wounded and so on
they were there
and Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala revealed verses
Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala revealed verses
that were so powerful
70 of the Muslims had been martyred approximately
one figure takes it a little bit higher than 70
and from amongst the disbelievers
between 20 and 40 of them were martyred
and subhanallah
the verses revealed by Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala
what happened to you
the day the two armies met in Uhud
was by the will of Allah
in order to know who are the true believers
and in order to know the hypocrites
and the hypocrites were told
come and fight in the cause of Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala
Allah says they responded
had we known how to fight
we would have been right behind you
and this was the exposure of Abdullah ibn Ubayy ibn Salun
he went back with so many men
on that day they were closer to disbelief
these hypocrites than they ever were to Iman
and Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala sent verses
saying
Allah has indeed fulfilled his promise to you
when you were executing these people one after the other
you see how it started
it started in a way where
the flag bearers of the mushriks were lost
or their lives were lost one after the other
and there was chaos in the ranks of the disbelievers
then Allah says
Arabic
until a point when you disobeyed
and you had become discouraged
because of your disobedience to Allah's messenger
sallallahu alayhi wasallam
after you saw that
which you loved
what was it that they loved
oh the booty of the war they saw so much of it
and they started rushing
so Allah is admonishing the archers to say
the reason why you had suffered loss
is because of your disobedience of the messenger
sallallahu alayhi wasallam
then Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala says
from amongst you there are some who wanted this worldly life
and some who were prepared for the life after death
Allah says
then by Allah's mercy
did Allah cause them to go away
so the mushriks of Makkah went away
and Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala says
Allah then forgave the believers
may Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala grant us from His mercy
Abu Sufyan as he was leaving
he looks at the messenger
sallallahu alayhi wasallam
and he uttered a statement
he says
a day for a day
which means you attacked us on Badr
today we have attacked you here
and as they were leaving
they said you will find from your dead
those who have been cut up and ripped up
after they were executed
I did not instruct this
they did it themselves
so don't hold it against us
but we will return next year
we will meet and we will fight again
same time at a place known as Badr
these were the last words of Abu Sufyan as he left
and inshallah tomorrow we will see
what was the aftermath of this battle of Uhud
where the Muslims did not win
but the kuffar did not win either
had they won they would have gone into Madina Munawwara
but they did not enter Madina Munawwara
they left from there
because they found even those who had remained of the Muslims
were fighting like brave warriors
may Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala grant us goodness
perhaps tomorrow we will see a little bit more what happened
and thereafter draw some lessons for us all
until we meet again
wa salallahu wa sallam wa baraka ala nabina Muhammad
subhanallahi wa bi hamdihi
subhanaka allahum wa bi hamdiki
ash-hadu an la ilaha illa anta
astaghfiruka wa natubu ilayh